Let's start talking then
about authentication.
So, the first thing that we need,
is to separate authentication
from authorization.
So, today we are going to be
focusing on authentication.
And, okay, what's the difference?
So, authentication has to do with,
validating the user's identity.
Users, or systems identity.
Sometimes it's not a person,
it can be a system that is identifying
itself over another system.
But most of the time on the web we
are talking about persons, users, okay?
Authenticating in our websites or
web apps or progressive web apps.
Authorization has to do
with what permissions and
privileges you have after
you were authenticated.
Sometimes authorization also has
to do with your user level and
also it has to do with how
the authorization token is being stored,
client side or server side.
If you have ever heard about
the authentication token, for example,
it has to do with that,
with authorization.
So, we will cover some basic ideas of
that, but 95% of today's workshops,
it's about authentication and
not authorization.
So we won't be discussing
Access Control List or
how you can connect to Microsoft
security systems to actually get current
user's credentials from the OS itself or
things like that, right?
So, we will be just talking about how
to register users in our websites,
how to login users in our websites and
web apps.
And how to get them back in our website
with the best possible user experience,
right?
So, quickly authentication or often,
verifies the identity of a user of or
a service, okay?
Within that umbrella,
we will be talking about the web, okay,
of course you also have authentication on
native apps on each platform is different.
But we will see, by the end of today's
course that even on native apps,
we can actually leverage everything
that we will learn today.
Because, for example, Web Authentication,
the API that we will cover later today,
is available also on Native Android,
Native iOS, Native MacOS.
The same thing,
of course they have a Native API, but
it's also the same Web Authentication
mechanism, so the same server.
And the server is the same, we are just
going to change the client and instead of
JavaScript we'll probably write Swift code
or Kotlin code in the case of Android.
So, some concepts, just to clarify
some concepts that we won't cover
deeply during the day, but
maybe we mentioned the concept.
So credentials, that's simple,
but actually credential is,
whatever is needed to identify
that user server side.
Like on a standard normal credential
is a username and password.
So it's a pair of username and
password, that's the credential.
But it can be something else, okay?
So we don't know yet
how biometric authentication works, but
we may say that our face
can be also credential.
It's actually wrong, that the future
is wrong, but for now let's say that,
to give an idea of other kind of
credentials that we might have.
So single sign on, so
probably concept that you have heard SSO.
This is a way that we have,
it's a sign on, okay, but
it has to do more with authorization
than with authentication.
The idea is that, to authenticate
the user with the same credentials on
different websites or different web apps.
I mean, in your company you
might have different web apps.
Well, the idea is that If
the user is logged in, in web A,
it may also be logged in automatically B,
C and D.
Okay, that's kind of the idea
of single sign on, okay?
So, two-factor authentication,
2FA, in case you heard that term.
The idea is that by default and we will
start with that after these slides.
By default,
we have one factor authentication.
I mean, if you have username and password
in a login form, that's one factor,
your username and password.
The idea is that we can add more.
Like, apart from that,
also I can send you an SMS code
that probably you're used to that.
I mean, broad you have a banking
application or website sometimes they will
send you a code through a text message,
or SMS, or WhatsApp, or email okay?
So those are two-factor authentication,
and later,
we will see how you can attach
those solutions to your project.
Multi-factor authentication,
MFA, is kind of another term for
two-factor instead of two is more than
two or two or more, okay, it's just that.
So, because of security sometimes,
we won't add as many factors us
we can because the thing is that,
if I need to login into my bank account
and the bank has my phone number.
What happens if my phone number
is stolen by let's say hacker,
hacker is not the right term,
but let's say hacker for now.
So, yeah, well,
maybe I want another factor.
So it can be my fingertip on a phone,
it can be my face, it can be a USB key.
So there are many other
factors that I can add.
So initially,
websites were adding support for
two factor authentication and now,
most of them, it's multifactor.
So you have a manager where
you can actually add more, or
add as many as you want or
as many as you have, okay?
So OAuth 2.0, it's actually,
it's not actually part of
authentication, it's more
part of authorization, okay?
And it's the way after the user
has been authenticated,
how can you keep that user logged
in websites, also native apps?
And OAuth 2.0 is a login flow,
where you can actually login
in a third party server.
For example, when you go to a website and
there is a button saying,
log in with Facebook, log in with GitHub.
And then you click there, you go to the
GitHub page, you log in at GitHub.com and
then you come back to the website.
And you are logged in in that
non-GitHub website, okay?
That's typically using OAuth 2.0.
JWT, JSON Web Token,
we will see one later, but
this also has to do more
with authorization.
The idea is that, how a website will
give me credential information or
metadata about current user.
Well, is it a JSON?
Is it like a comma separated value?
Well, there is a standard known as
JSON Web Token that we will mention later,
that is just typically a string.
So it's a string that is kind
of encoded in this format.
So it's a format where we can encode
metadata for credentials, okay?
So that's JSON Web Token.
One Time Password, OTP, okay, is another
term that we may be using later.
This is when you receive a code by SMS or
a code by email that then you need to copy
and paste in the website to
confirm that that's your phone or
that your email address.
Well, that's that's known as OTP,
One Time Password, okay?
And the OTP concept is
also used these days for
something that we will mention
later known as magic links.
Have you heard about magic links?
Like when you get to your website and some
websites are offering you a magic link.
And there you wonder, what's a magic link?
Well, a way to login into
the website without the password.
So it's one of the password
less mechanisms these days.
And it's using this idea
known as One Time Password.
And by the way, I'm not sure if
you know there is an API today.
It's called Web OTP that
we may mention later.
So it's an API where you
can actually in JavaScript,
you can read SMSS that are coming
using OTP with the code.
So you can read the code in JavaScript.
So you don't need to wait for the user
to open the messages' app and copy and
paste the code.
JavaScript can actually read the code
if you follow some guidelines,
that's web OTP.
And finally, the last concept
we will mention this many times,
Public Key Cryptography.
So, the idea here is that maybe
you have heard about this,
I'm not sure if you
understand how that works.
We are not going to get here
today too deep into the internals
on how this these things works
internally or mathematically.
But actually what happens is that,
we will create two keys, a public key and
a private key that they are tied
together with some algorithm.
And the public key can be public,
so it can be anywhere,
it can be in local storage in a server,
anywhere.
And the private key is actually
the one that is secret and
no one will actually get, okay?
So, we will see this in action later and
how it works with authentication.
Do you have any questions at this
point on any of these concepts?
Yeah.
>> Is a touch ID or fingerprint scanner
needed to test biometric authentication?
>> Well, by definition biometric
means it's something about your body.
So if the question is,
do we need to have a device for
today's workshop to actually test that,
the answer is no, we don't need that.
In fact, we will see that the API
that let us use biometrics also
works with other ideas,
not just with biometrics.
So, you don't need to have like
a phone with fouch ID or face ID or
Androids biometric authentication.
You don't need that to test the code,
okay?
You will be able to test the code
with other techniques anyway.
And also we will talk about simulation and
debugging tools later.